---
layout: post
title: Primal Scream
subtitle: Fragments of Becoming and Being
image: /img/primal.png
excerpt: In the beginning there was not the word, but the act as creation through a simple saying. As a speech act and autopoiesis, the creation by oneself and out of oneself. All of us, one might think, are little more than the physical continuations and psychosocial breaks of that primary act, whomever or whatever it emanated. On the one hand, as the biological actors of its repetition in the act of reproduction as a sympoetic doing-something or, to put it more simply, doing something together. Nevertheless, birth — as a genetically “tainted” mimesis of bringing into the world through language itself — refers in the “primal scream” of mother and child both to language as an act of creation of the mind and to the pain and being at the mercy of every creative process Act.
tags: [Journal, Leipzig, Germany]
---

In the beginning there was not the word, but the act as creation through a simple saying. As a speech act and autopoiesis, the creation by oneself and out of oneself. All of us, one might think, are little more than the physical continuations and psychosocial breaks of that primary act, whomever or whatever it emanated. On the one hand, as the biological actors of its repetition in the act of reproduction as a sympoetic doing-something or, to put it more simply, doing something together. Nevertheless, birth — as a genetically “tainted” mimesis of bringing into the world through language itself — refers in the “primal scream” of mother and child both to language as an act of creation of the mind and to the pain and being at the mercy of every creative process Act.

The incarnation — the wanted or unwanted, but inevitable Heidegger being thrown into the world — opens up a further level of this exegesis of the history of action. On the one hand, in the field of tension of the newborn child between absolute helplessness and future (at least theoretically) unlimited power to act. On the other hand, the emergence of the inexperienced, ignorant and innocent refers to a spatial and moral dimension of being. Culturally, this lies in the allegorical space of paradise as a “suburb” to the act of sin, which is only open to those who act innocently (and thus paradoxically inhuman).

But paradise is at the same time a place of eternal happiness and the scene of the painful act of the Incarnation, since the inevitable expulsion already resides in it. For all those displaced in this way, the most difficult act of being is the negotiation of this very being as a relationship to oneself and everything else. However, language as a tool for thinking and negotiating forms an indissoluble contradiction (in the literal and figurative sense) to the unconscious space of action of paradise, from which it has, as it were, emancipated and “renounced” itself. Every striving for happiness therefore already contains its failure and thus the tragedy of human existence.
